PROTOCOL 
AMENDING THE CONVENTION BETWEEN  
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF JAPAN 
FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION 
AND THE PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION 
WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME 

The Government of the United States of America and the 

Government of Japan, 

Desiring to amend the Convention between the Government 

of the United States of America and the Government of Japan 
for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of 
Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income signed at 
Washington on 6 November 2003 (hereinafter referred to as “the 
Convention”) and the Protocol, which forms an integral part of 
the Convention, signed at Washington on 6 November 2003 
(hereinafter referred to as “the Protocol of 2003”), 

Have agreed as follows: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE I 

Paragraph 5 of Article 1 of the Convention shall be 

deleted and replaced by the following: 

     “5.  The provisions of paragraph 4 shall not affect the 

benefits conferred by a Contracting State under 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 9, paragraph 3 of Article 
17, and Articles 18, 19, 23, 24, 25 and 28, but in the 
case of benefits conferred by the United States under 
Articles 18 and 19 only if the individuals claiming the 
benefits are neither citizens of, nor have been lawfully 
admitted for permanent residence in, the United States.” 

ARTICLE II 

Paragraph 4 of Article 4 of the Convention shall be 

deleted and replaced by the following: 

     “4.  Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 a 

person other than an individual is a resident of both 
Contracting States, such person shall not be considered a 
resident of either Contracting State for the purposes of 
its claiming any benefits provided by this Convention.” 

ARTICLE III 

1.  Subparagraph (a) of paragraph 3 of Article 10 of the 
Convention shall be amended by deleting the terms “more than 
50 percent” and replacing them with the terms “at least 50 
percent”, and deleting the words “twelve months” and replacing 
them with the words “six months”. 

2.  Paragraph 9 of Article 10 of the Convention shall be 
amended by deleting the terms “or 2” everywhere they appear 
within the paragraph. 

ARTICLE IV 

Article 11 of the Convention shall be deleted and 

replaced by the following: 

“ARTICLE 11 

1.  Interest arising in a Contracting State and 
beneficially owned by a resident of the other Contracting 
State may be taxed only in that other Contracting State. 

2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1: 

(a)  interest arising in a Contracting State that is 
determined by reference to receipts, sales, 
income, profits or other cash flow of the 
debtor or a related person, to any change in 
the value of any property of the debtor or a 
related person or to any dividend, partnership 
distribution or similar payment made by the 
debtor or a related person, or any other 
interest similar to such interest arising in a 
Contracting State, may be taxed in the 
Contracting State in which it arises, and 
according to the laws of that Contracting 
State, but if the beneficial owner of the 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interest is a resident of the other Contracting 
State, the tax so charged shall not exceed 10 
percent of the gross amount of the interest; 
and 

(b)  a Contracting State may tax, in accordance with 
its domestic law, interest paid with respect to 
the ownership interests in an entity used for 
the securitization of real estate mortgages or 
other assets, to the extent that the amount of 
interest paid exceeds the return on comparable 
debt instruments as specified by the law of 
that Contracting State. 

3.  Interest shall be deemed to arise in a Contracting 
State when the payor is a resident of that Contracting 
State.  Where, however, the person paying the interest, 
whether such person is a resident of a Contracting State 
or not, has in a state other than that of which such 
person is a resident a permanent establishment in 
connection with which the indebtedness on which the 
interest is paid was incurred, and such interest is borne 
by such permanent establishment, then: 

(a)  if the permanent establishment is situated in a 
Contracting State, such interest shall be 
deemed to arise in that Contracting State, and 

(b)  if the permanent establishment is situated in a 

state other than the Contracting States, such 
interest shall not be deemed to arise in either 
Contracting State. 

4.  The term “interest” as used in this Article means 
income from debt-claims of every kind, whether or not 
secured by mortgage and whether or not carrying a right 
to participate in the debtor’s profits, and in 
particular, income from government securities and income 
from bonds or debentures, including premiums and prizes 
attaching to such securities, bonds or debentures, and 
all other income that is subjected to the same taxation 
treatment as income from money lent by the tax laws of 
the Contracting State in which the income arises.  Income 
dealt with in Article 10 shall not be regarded as 
interest for the purposes of this Convention. 

5.  The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply 
if the beneficial owner of the interest, being a resident 
of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other 
Contracting State in which the interest arises, through a 
permanent establishment situated therein and the debt-
claim in respect of which the interest is paid is 
effectively connected with such permanent establishment.  
In such case the provisions of Article 7 shall apply. 

6.  Where, by reason of a special relationship between 
the payor and the beneficial owner or between both of 
them and some other person, the amount of the interest, 
having regard to the debt-claim for which it is paid, 
exceeds the amount which would have been agreed upon by 
the payor and the beneficial owner in the absence of such 
relationship, the provisions of this Article shall apply 
only to the last-mentioned amount.  In such case, the 
excess part of the payment may be taxed in the 
Contracting State in which it arises at a rate not to 
exceed 5 percent of the gross amount of the excess. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.  A resident of a Contracting State shall not be 
considered the beneficial owner of interest in respect of 
a debt-claim if such debt-claim would not have been 
established unless a person:  

(a)  that is not entitled to benefits with respect 

to interest arising in the other Contracting 
State which are equivalent to, or more 
favorable than, those available under this 
Convention to a resident of the first-mentioned 
Contracting State; and 

(b)  that is not a resident of either Contracting 

State;  

held an equivalent debt-claim against the  
first-mentioned resident.” 

ARTICLE V 

1.  Paragraph 2 of Article 13 of the Convention shall be 
deleted and replaced by the following: 

     “2.  For the purposes of this Article the term “real 

property situated in the other Contracting State” shall 
include: 

(a)  real property referred to in Article 6; 

(b)  where that other Contracting State is Japan, 

shares or interests in a company, partnership 
or trust deriving the value of its property 
directly or indirectly principally from real 
property referred to in Article 6 and situated 
in Japan; and 

(c)  where that other Contracting State is the 

United States, a United States real property 
interest.” 

2.  Paragraph 4 of Article 13 of the Convention shall be 
deleted and replaced by the following: 

“4. 

Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 3, gains 

from the alienation of any property, other than real 
property, forming part of the business property of a 
permanent establishment which an enterprise of a 
Contracting State has in the other Contracting State, 
including such gains from the alienation of such a 
permanent establishment (alone or with the whole 
enterprise), may be taxed in that other Contracting 
State.” 

ARTICLE VI 

Article 15 of the Convention shall be deleted and 

replaced by the following: 

“ARTICLE 15 

Directors’ fees and other similar payments derived 

by a resident of a Contracting State in his capacity as a 
member of the board of directors of a company which is a 
resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in 
that other Contracting State.” 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 20 of the Convention shall be deleted and 

replaced by the following: 

ARTICLE VII 

“ARTICLE 20 (Deleted)” 

ARTICLE VIII 

Clause (i) of subparagraph (b) of paragraph 5 of Article 

22 of the Convention shall be amended by deleting the words 
“the Securities and Exchange Law” and replacing them with the 
words “the Financial Instruments and Exchange Law”. 

ARTICLE IX 

Paragraph 1 of Article 23 of the Convention shall be 

deleted and replaced by the following: 

     “1.  (a)  Subject to the provisions of the laws of Japan 

regarding the allowance as a credit against the 
Japanese tax of tax payable in any country 
other than Japan, where a resident of Japan 
derives income from the United States which may 
be taxed in the United States in accordance 
with the provisions of this Convention, the 
amount of the United States tax payable in 
respect of that income shall be allowed as a 
credit against the Japanese tax imposed on that 
resident.  The amount of credit, however, shall 
not exceed the amount of the Japanese tax which 
is appropriate to that income.  For the purposes 
of the preceding provisions of this 
subparagraph, income beneficially owned by a 
resident of Japan which may be taxed in the 
United States in accordance with the Convention 
shall be deemed to arise from sources in the 
United States. 

(b)  Subject to the provisions, other than the 
provisions with regard to ownership 
requirements of shares, of the laws of Japan 
regarding the exclusion of dividends from the 
basis upon which the Japanese tax is imposed, 
where the income derived from the United States 
is dividends paid by a company which is a 
resident of the United States to a company 
which is a resident of Japan and has owned at 
least 10 percent of the total shares issued by 
that company, during the period of six months 
immediately before the day when the obligation 
to pay dividends is confirmed, such dividends 
shall be excluded from the basis upon which the 
Japanese tax is imposed.” 

ARTICLE X 

1.  Paragraph 3 of Article 24 of the Convention shall be 
amended by deleting the words “paragraph 8 of Article 11” and 
replacing them with the words “paragraph 6 of Article 11”. 

2.  Paragraph 5 of Article 24 of the Convention shall be 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amended by deleting the words “or paragraph 10 of Article 11”. 

ARTICLE XI 

Article 25 of the Convention shall be amended by adding 

the following after paragraph 4: 

     “5.  Where, pursuant to this Article, a person has 
presented a case to the competent authority of the 
Contracting State of which he is a resident or, if his 
case comes under paragraph 1 of Article 24, to that of 
the Contracting State of which he is a national, on the 
basis that the actions of one or both of the Contracting 
States have resulted for that person in taxation not in 
accordance with the provisions of this Convention, and 
the competent authorities of the Contracting States are 
unable to reach an agreement to resolve that case, the 
case shall be resolved through arbitration conducted in 
the manner prescribed by, and subject to the requirements 
of, this paragraph, paragraphs 6 and 7, and any rules or 
procedures agreed upon by the competent authorities of 
both Contracting States pursuant to subparagraph (i) of 
paragraph 7, if: 

(a)  the presenter of the case has submitted a 
written request to the relevant competent 
authority for resolution of the case through 
arbitration; and  

(b)  all concerned persons and their authorized 

representatives or agents have provided written 
statements not to disclose to any person 
(except other concerned persons) any 
information received during the course of the 
arbitration proceeding from the competent 
authorities of either Contracting State or the 
arbitration panel, other than the determination 
of such panel. 

6.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 5, a 
case shall not be submitted to arbitration if: 

(a)  a decision with respect to such case has 
already been rendered by a court or 
administrative tribunal of either Contracting 
State; 

(b)  the competent authorities of both Contracting 
States have agreed that the case is not 
suitable for resolution through arbitration and 
have notified the presenter of the case of such 
agreement no later than two years after the 
commencement date; or 

(c)  the case is the subject only of the provisions 

set forth in the final sentence of paragraph 3. 

7.  For the purposes of paragraphs 5, 6 and this 
paragraph, the following rules and definitions shall 
apply: 

(a)  The term “concerned person” means the presenter 

of a case to a competent authority for 
consideration under this Article and all other 
persons, if any, whose tax liability to either 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contracting State may be directly affected by a 
mutual agreement arising from that 
consideration. 

(b)  The “commencement date” for a case is the 

earliest date on which the information 
necessary to undertake substantive 
consideration for a mutual agreement has been 
received by the competent authorities of both 
Contracting States. 

(c)  An arbitration proceeding pursuant to this 

Article with respect to a case (other than a 
case described in subparagraph (d)) shall begin 
on the later of: 

(i)  two years after the commencement date of 

that case, unless the competent 
authorities of both Contracting States 
have agreed to a different date and 
notified the presenter of the case of such 
agreement; and   

(ii)  the earliest date upon which the 

requirements of subparagraphs (a) and (b) 
of paragraph 5 have been satisfied. 

(d)  An arbitration proceeding pursuant to this 
Article with respect to a case that is the 
subject of a request for an advance pricing 
arrangement, shall begin on the later of: 

(i)  six months after an official notification 

has been issued by the tax authority of 
either Contracting State of a correction 
of, or an intent to adjust, the pricing of 
a transaction or transfer covered by a 
request for an advance pricing arrangement 
regarding a concerned person, unless the 
competent authorities of both Contracting 
States have agreed to a different date and 
notified the presenter of the case of such 
agreement; and 

(ii)  the earliest date upon which the 

requirements of subparagraphs (a) and (b) 
of paragraph 5 have been satisfied. 

However, in no event shall the arbitration 
proceeding begin any earlier than two years 
after the date on which the information 
necessary to undertake substantive 
consideration for a mutual agreement on the 
advance pricing arrangement has been received 
by the competent authorities of both 
Contracting States. 

(e)  Unless the presenter of the case does not 

accept the determination of the arbitration 
panel, such determination shall constitute a 
resolution by mutual agreement of the entire 
case under this Article at the time it is 
timely accepted by the presenter and shall be 
binding on both Contracting States.  The 
resolution resulting from the determination of 
the arbitration panel shall be implemented 
notwithstanding any time limits or procedural 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limitations in the law of the Contracting 
States, except such limitations as apply for 
the purposes of giving effect to such a 
resolution.  

(f)  For the purposes of an arbitration proceeding 
under paragraph 5 and this paragraph, the 
members of the arbitration panel and their 
staff shall be considered to be “persons or 
authorities” to whom information may be 
disclosed under Article 26. 

(g)  No information relating to an arbitration 

proceeding (including the determination of the 
arbitration panel) may be disclosed by the 
competent authorities of the Contracting 
States, except as permitted by this Convention 
and the laws of the Contracting States.  In 
addition, all material prepared in the course 
of, or relating to, an arbitration proceeding 
shall be considered to be information exchanged 
between the competent authorities of the 
Contracting States pursuant to Article 26. 

(h)  The competent authorities of both Contracting 

States shall ensure that all members of the 
arbitration panel and their staff agree in 
written statements sent to each of the 
competent authorities of the Contracting States 
not to disclose any information relating to an 
arbitration proceeding (including the 
determination of the arbitration panel), and to 
abide by and be subject to the confidentiality 
and nondisclosure provisions of Article 26 and 
similar provisions of relevant laws of the 
Contracting States.  Such statements shall also 
include their acceptance to serve on the 
arbitration panel.  Notwithstanding the 
provisions of this subparagraph, the members of 
the arbitration panel or their staff shall 
disclose the determination of the arbitration 
panel to the competent authorities of both 
Contracting States. 

(i)  The competent authorities of both Contracting 

States shall agree in writing, before the date 
that the first arbitration proceeding 
commences, on time periods and procedures that 
are consistent with paragraphs 5, 6 and this 
paragraph for: 

(i)  notifying the presenter of the case of a 

modified date for the beginning of an 
arbitration proceeding under clause (i) of 
subparagraph (c) and clause (i) of 
subparagraph (d); 

(ii)  the appropriate application of arbitration 

in the context of advance pricing 
arrangements, including rules concerning 
the date on which an arbitration 
proceeding shall begin with respect to 
such arrangements; 

(iii)  obtaining the nondisclosure statements 

required by subparagraph (b) of paragraph 
5 and subparagraph (h) of this paragraph 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from each concerned person, authorized 
representative or agent, and member of the 
arbitration panel (including their staff); 

(iv)  the appointment of the members of the 

arbitration panel; 

(v)  the submission of proposed resolutions, 

position papers, and reply submissions by 
the competent authorities of the 
Contracting States to the arbitration 
panel; 

(vi)  the submission by the presenter of the 
case of a paper setting forth the 
presenter’s views and analysis of the case 
for consideration by the arbitration 
panel; 

(vii)  the delivery by the arbitration panel of 
its determination to the competent 
authorities of both Contracting States;  

(viii)  the acceptance or rejection by the 

presenter of the case of the determination 
of the arbitration panel; and 

(ix)  the adoption by the arbitration panel of 

any additional procedures necessary for 
the conduct of its business. 

The competent authorities of both Contracting States 

may agree in writing on such other rules and procedures 
as may be necessary for the effective and timely 
implementation of the provisions of paragraphs 5, 6 and 
this paragraph.” 

Article 26 of the Convention shall be deleted and 

replaced by the following: 

ARTICLE XII 

“ARTICLE 26 

1.  The competent authorities of the Contracting States 
shall exchange such information as is foreseeably 
relevant for carrying out the provisions of this 
Convention or to the administration or enforcement of the 
domestic laws concerning taxes of every kind and 
description imposed on behalf of the Contracting States, 
insofar as the taxation thereunder is not contrary to the 
Convention.  The exchange of information is not restricted 
by paragraph 1 of Article 1 and Article 2.  If 
specifically requested by the competent authority of a 
Contracting State, the competent authority of the other 
Contracting State shall provide information under this 
Article in the form of authenticated copies of original 
documents (including books, papers, statements, records, 
accounts, and writings). 

2.  Any information received under paragraph 1 by a 
Contracting State shall be treated as secret in the same 
manner as information obtained under the laws of that 
Contracting State and shall be disclosed only to persons 
or authorities (including courts and administrative 
bodies) involved in the assessment, collection or 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
administration of, the enforcement or prosecution in 
respect of, or the determination of appeals in relation 
to, the taxes referred to in paragraph 1, or the 
oversight of such functions.  Such persons or authorities 
shall use the information only for such purposes.  They 
may disclose the information in public court proceedings 
or in judicial decisions.  

3.  In no case shall the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 
2 be construed so as to impose on a Contracting State the 
obligation: 

(a)  to carry out administrative measures at 

variance with the laws and administrative 
practice of that or of the other Contracting 
State; 

(b)  to supply information which is not obtainable 
under the laws or in the normal course of the 
administration of that or of the other 
Contracting State; 

(c)  to supply information which would disclose any 
trade, business, industrial, commercial or 
professional secret or trade process, or 
information the disclosure of which would be 
contrary to public policy; or 

(d)  to obtain or provide information that would 

reveal confidential communications between a 
client and an attorney, solicitor or other 
admitted legal representative where such 
communications are: 

(i)  produced for the purposes of seeking or 

providing legal advice; or 

(ii)  produced for the purposes of use in 
existing or contemplated legal 
proceedings. 

4.  If information is requested by a Contracting State 
in accordance with this Article, the other Contracting 
State shall use its information gathering measures to 
obtain the requested information, even though that other 
Contracting State may not need such information for its 
own tax purposes.  The obligation contained in the 
preceding sentence is subject to the limitations of 
paragraph 3 but in no case shall such limitations be 
construed to permit a Contracting State to decline to 
supply information solely because it has no domestic 
interest in such information. 

5.  In no case shall the provisions of paragraph 3 be 
construed to permit a Contracting State to decline to 
supply information solely because the information is held 
by a bank, other financial institution, nominee or person 
acting in an agency or a fiduciary capacity or because it 
relates to ownership interests in a person.” 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 27 of the Convention shall be deleted and 

replaced by the following: 

ARTICLE XIII 

“ARTICLE 27 

1.  Subject to the provisions of this Article, the 
Contracting States shall lend assistance to each other in 
the collection of taxes, insofar as the taxation is not 
contrary to this Convention or any other agreement to 
which the Contracting States are parties, together with 
interest, costs of collection, additions to such taxes, 
and civil or administrative penalties related to such 
taxes (hereinafter referred to in this Article as a 
“revenue claim”).  This assistance is not restricted by 
paragraph 1 of Article 1 and Article 2.  Any assistance 
provided by a Contracting State shall be only to the 
extent allowable under the law of that Contracting State. 

2.  The assistance under paragraph 1 shall be lent only 
in the collection of the following revenue claims: 

(a)  a revenue claim in respect of a company: 

(i)  the determination of which is not eligible 

to be resolved by mutual agreement 
procedure pursuant to Article 25; 

(ii)  the determination of which has been 

mutually agreed upon pursuant to Article 
25; or 

(iii)  with respect to the determination of which 

the company has terminated the mutual 
agreement procedure; 

(b)  a revenue claim in respect of an individual.  

However, if the individual is a national of the 
Contracting State from which assistance is 
requested (hereinafter referred to as the 
“requested State”) at the time the application 
for assistance is received, assistance shall be 
lent only for revenue claims with respect to 
which the individual or a person acting on 
behalf of the individual: 

(i)  has filed a fraudulent tax return or a 

fraudulent claim for refund; 

(ii)  has willfully failed to file a tax return 

to evade taxes; or 

(iii)  has transferred assets into the requested 

State to avoid collection of the revenue 
claim. 

3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, the 
assistance under paragraph 1 shall be lent in the 
collection of revenue claims that is necessary to ensure 
that any exemption or reduced rate of tax granted under 
this Convention shall not be enjoyed by persons not 
entitled thereto, provided that the requested State 
agrees with such determination of improper granting of 
benefits. 

4.  The provisions of this Article shall only apply to 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revenue claims in respect of the taxes covered by Article 
2 and in addition, the following taxes: 

(a)  in the case of Japan: 

(i)  the consumption tax; 

(ii)  the inheritance tax; and  

(iii)  the gift tax; 

(b)  in the case of the United States: 

(i)  the Federal estate and gift taxes; 

(ii)  the Federal excise tax on insurance 

policies issued by foreign insurers; 

(iii)  the Federal excise taxes imposed with 

respect to private foundations; and 

(iv)  the Federal taxes related to employment 

and self-employment. 

5.  An application for assistance in the collection of a 
revenue claim, other than the collection of a revenue 
claim described in paragraph 3, shall include a 
certification by the competent authority of the 
Contracting State applying for such assistance 
(hereinafter referred to as the “applicant State”) that, 
under the laws of the applicant State, the revenue claim 
has been finally determined.  For the purposes of this 
Article, a revenue claim is finally determined when the 
applicant State has the right under its domestic law to 
collect the revenue claim and all applicable 
administrative and judicial rights of the taxpayer to 
dispute or appeal the revenue claim have lapsed or been 
exhausted. 

6.  When an application for assistance by the applicant 
State has been accepted for collection by the requested 
State pursuant to the provisions of this Article, the 
revenue claim of the applicant State shall be treated, to 
the extent necessary for collection under the laws of the 
requested State, as assessed under the laws of the 
requested State (as of the time the application is 
received), and shall be collected by the requested State 
as though such revenue claim were the requested State’s 
own revenue claim in accordance with the laws applicable 
to the collection of the requested State’s own revenue 
claims. 

7.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 6, acts 
of collection carried out by the requested State in 
pursuance of an application for assistance, which, 
according to the laws of the applicant State, would have 
the effect of suspending or interrupting the period of 
limitation on the collection of a revenue claim in the 
applicant State if carried out by the applicant State, 
shall also have this effect with respect to the revenue 
claim under the laws of the applicant State.  The 
requested State shall inform the applicant State about 
such acts. 

8.  A revenue claim with respect to which assistance is 
being lent by the requested State shall not, in that 
Contracting State, be subject to the time limits, or 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accorded any priority, applicable to a revenue claim 
under the laws of that Contracting State by reason of its 
nature as such. 

9.  Nothing in this Article shall be construed as 
creating or providing any rights of administrative or 
judicial review by the requested State of the applicant 
State’s finally determined revenue claim, irrespective of 
any such rights that may be available under the laws of 
either Contracting State.  

10.  If, at any time pending execution of an application 
for assistance under this Article, the applicant State 
loses the right under its domestic law to collect the 
revenue claim or otherwise terminates collection, the 
competent authority of the applicant State shall promptly 
withdraw the application for assistance in collection and 
the requested State shall cease all measures of 
collection of the revenue claim.  

11.  If, at any time pending execution of an application 
for assistance under this Article, the applicant State 
suspends collection of the revenue claim according to the 
laws of the applicant State, the competent authority of 
the applicant State shall promptly notify the competent 
authority of the requested State of that fact, and the 
competent authority of the applicant State shall either 
suspend or withdraw its request at the option of the 
competent authority of the requested State and the 
requested State shall suspend or cease all measures of 
collection of the revenue claim accordingly. 

12.  Amounts collected by the requested State pursuant to 
this Article shall be remitted to the competent authority 
of the applicant State.   

13.  Unless the competent authorities of both Contracting 
States otherwise agree, the ordinary costs incurred in 
providing assistance in collection shall be borne by the 
requested State and any extraordinary costs so incurred 
shall be borne by the applicant State. 

14.  In no case shall the provisions of this Article be 
construed so as to impose on the requested State the 
obligation to carry out: 

(a)  administrative measures at variance with the 
laws and administrative practices of the 
requested State or of the applicant State; or 

(b)  measures which would be contrary to public 

policy. 

15.  In no case shall the provisions of this Article be 
construed so as to impose on the requested State an 
obligation to accept an application of the applicant 
State:  

(a)  if the applicant State has not pursued all 

appropriate measures to collect the revenue 
claim that is the subject of the application 
for assistance available under its laws or 
administrative practices; or  

(b)  if the administrative burden for the requested 
State is substantially disproportionate to the 
benefit to be derived by the applicant State. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.  Before assistance is lent under the provisions of 
this Article, other than under paragraph 3, the competent 
authorities of both Contracting States shall agree upon 
the mode of application of this Article, including an 
agreement to ensure comparable levels of assistance to 
each of the Contracting States.  In particular, the 
competent authorities of both Contracting States shall 
agree on a limit to the number of applications for 
assistance that a Contracting State may make in a 
particular year, as well as a minimum monetary threshold 
for a revenue claim for which assistance is sought, and 
procedural rules related to the remittance of amounts 
collected pursuant to the provisions of this Article.” 

ARTICLE XIV 

1.  Subparagraph (a) of paragraph 1 of the Protocol of 2003 
shall be amended by deleting the words “United States excise 
tax” and replacing them with the words “Federal excise tax,” 
and subparagraph (b) of that paragraph shall be amended by 
deleting the words “United States excise tax” and replacing 
them with the words “Federal excise taxes”. 

2.  Paragraph 9 of the Protocol of 2003 shall be deleted and 
replaced by the following: 

     “9.  (Deleted)” 

3.  The Protocol of 2003 shall be amended by adding the 
following after paragraph 13: 

     “14.  With reference to paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of Article 

25 of the Convention: 

(a)  It is understood that taxation shall be 

considered to have resulted for the purpose of 
paragraph 5 of Article 25 of the Convention 
from the actions of one or both of the 
Contracting States as soon as tax has been 
paid, assessed or otherwise determined (for 
example, a notification of correction, 
determination or deficiency of a tax liability 
has been issued), or in cases where the 
taxpayer is officially notified by the tax 
authorities that they intend to tax him on a 
certain element of income (for example, a 
notice of proposed adjustment has been issued).  

(b)  The arbitration panel shall consist of three 

individual members.  The members appointed shall 
not be employees nor have been employees within 
the twelve-month period prior to the date on 
which the arbitration proceeding begins, of the 
tax administration, the Treasury Department, or 
the Ministry of Finance of the Contracting 
State which identifies them.  Each competent 
authority of the Contracting States shall 
select one member of the arbitration panel.  In 
the event that the competent authority of a 
Contracting State fails to make such selection 
in the manner and within the time periods 
agreed by the competent authorities of both 
Contracting States pursuant to subparagraph (i) 
of paragraph 7 of Article 25 of the Convention, 
the competent authority of the other 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contracting State shall select a second member 
of the arbitration panel.  The two members so 
selected shall select a third member, who shall 
serve as Chair of the arbitration panel.  If the 
two initial members of the arbitration panel 
fail to select the third member in the manner 
and within the time periods agreed by the 
competent authorities of both Contracting 
States pursuant to subparagraph (i) of 
paragraph 7 of Article 25 of the Convention, 
these members shall be dismissed, and each 
competent authority of the Contracting States 
shall select a new member of the arbitration 
panel.  The Chair shall not be a national or 
lawful permanent resident of either Contracting 
State.  Furthermore, the members appointed shall 
not have any prior involvement with the 
specific matters at issue in the arbitration 
proceeding for which they are being considered 
as members of the arbitration panel. 

(c)  If at any time before the arbitration panel 

delivers a determination to the competent 
authorities of the Contracting States: 

(i)  the competent authorities of the 

Contracting States reach a mutual 
agreement to resolve the case pursuant to 
Article 25 of the Convention; 

(ii)  the presenter of the case withdraws the 

request for arbitration; 

(iii)  a decision concerning the case is rendered 

by a court or administrative tribunal of 
one of the Contracting States during the 
arbitration proceeding; or 

(iv)  if any concerned person or their 

authorized representatives or agents 
willfully violates the written 
nondisclosure statement required by 
subparagraph (b) of paragraph 5 of Article 
25 of the Convention, and the competent 
authorities of both Contracting States 
agree that such violation should result in 
the termination of the arbitration 
proceeding; 

the mutual agreement procedure, including the 
arbitration proceeding, with respect to the 
case shall terminate. 

(d)  The competent authority of each of the 

Contracting States shall be permitted to submit 
a proposed resolution addressing each 
adjustment or similar issue raised in the case.  
Such proposed resolution shall be a resolution 
of the entire case, and shall reflect, without 
modification, all matters in the case 
previously agreed between the competent 
authorities of both Contracting States.  Such 
proposed resolution shall be limited to a 
disposition of specific monetary amounts (for 
example, of income, profit, gain or expense) 
or, where specified, the maximum rate of tax 
charged pursuant to the Convention, for each 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adjustment or similar issue in the case, based 
on the application of the Convention to the 
case.  The competent authority of each of the 
Contracting States shall also be permitted to 
submit a position paper for consideration by 
the arbitration panel.   

(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph 

(d), in the case of an arbitration proceeding 
concerning: 

(i)  the taxation of an individual with respect 

to whom the competent authorities of the 
Contracting States have been unable to 
reach an agreement regarding the 
Contracting State of which the individual 
is a resident;  

(ii)  the taxation of the business profits of an 
enterprise with respect to which the 
competent authorities of the Contracting 
States have been unable to reach an 
agreement on whether a permanent 
establishment exists; or  

(iii)  such other issues the determination of 

which are contingent on resolution of 
similar threshold questions;  

the competent authorities of the Contracting 
States may submit proposed resolutions 
separately addressing the relevant threshold 
questions as described in clause (i), (ii) or 
(iii) above (for example, the question of 
whether a permanent establishment exists), and 
the contingent determinations (for example, the 
determination of the amount of profit 
attributable to such permanent establishment).   

(f)  Where an arbitration proceeding concerns a case 
comprising multiple adjustments or similar 
issues each requiring a disposition of specific 
monetary amounts (for example, of income, 
profit, gains or expense) or where specified, 
the maximum rate of tax charged pursuant to the 
Convention, the proposed resolution may propose 
a separate disposition for each adjustment or 
similar issue. 

(g)  Each of the competent authorities of the 

Contracting States shall receive the proposed 
resolution and position paper submitted by the 
other competent authority, and shall be 
permitted to submit a reply submission to the 
arbitration panel.  Each of the competent 
authorities of the Contracting States shall 
also receive the reply submission of the other 
competent authority. 

(h)  The presenter of the case shall be permitted to 
submit for consideration by the arbitration 
panel a paper setting forth its analysis and 
views of the case.  Such submission shall not 
include any information not previously provided 
to the competent authorities during the mutual 
agreement procedure and shall be made available 
to the competent authorities of both 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contracting States.  

(i)  The arbitration panel shall deliver a 

determination in writing to the competent 
authorities of the Contracting States.  The 
determination of the arbitration panel shall be 
limited to one of the proposed resolutions 
submitted by the competent authorities of the 
Contracting States for each adjustment or 
similar issue and any threshold questions, and 
shall not include a rationale or any other 
explanation of the determination.  The 
determination of the arbitration panel shall 
have no precedential value with respect to the 
application of the Convention in any other 
case. 

(j)  Unless the competent authorities of both 

Contracting States agree to a longer time 
period, the presenter of the case shall have 45 
days after receiving the determination of the 
arbitration panel to notify, in writing, the 
competent authority of the Contracting State to 
whom the case was presented, of his acceptance 
of the determination.  If the presenter of the 
case fails to so advise the relevant competent 
authority, the determination shall be 
considered not to be accepted.  In addition, in 
the event the case is pending in litigation or 
appeal, the determination of the arbitration 
panel shall be considered not to be accepted by 
the presenter of the case if any concerned 
person who is a party to the litigation or 
appeal does not advise, within the same time 
frame described above, the relevant court or 
administrative tribunal of its intention to 
withdraw from consideration all issues resolved 
in the arbitration proceeding.  Where the 
determination of the arbitration panel is not 
accepted, the case will not be eligible for any 
further consideration by the competent 
authorities. 

(k)  The fees and expenses of the members of the 
arbitration panel, as well as any costs 
incurred in connection with the proceeding by 
the Contracting States, shall be borne 
equitably by the Contracting States. 

15.  With reference to paragraph 5 of Article 27 of the 
Convention: 

(a)  For the purposes of evaluating the final 

determination of a revenue claim: 

(i)  in the case of the United States, any 
administrative or judicial rights 
available to the taxpayer in connection 
with the revenue claim that arise after 
the collection of the revenue claim;  

(ii)  in the case of Japan, the right to take 

action pursuant to Article 36 of the 
Administrative Case Litigation Act (Law 
No. 139 of 1962) of Japan; 

shall not be taken into account.   

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b)  A Contracting State may suspend assistance if 

it determines that the actions of the other 
Contracting State have resulted in an imbalance 
in the levels of assistance between the 
Contracting States contemplated in Article 27 
of the Convention.  In such case, the 
Contracting States shall enter into 
consultations with a view to restoring 
comparable levels of assistance consistent with 
paragraph 16 of Article 27 of the Convention.” 

ARTICLE XV 

1.  This Protocol shall be subject to ratification, and the 
instruments of ratification shall be exchanged as soon as 
possible.  It shall enter into force on the date of the 
exchange of instruments of ratification.  

2.  This Protocol shall have effect: 

(a)  in respect of taxes withheld at source, for amounts 

paid or credited on or after the first day of the 
third month next following the date on which the 
Protocol enters into force;  

(b)  in respect of other taxes, for taxable years 

beginning on or after the first day of January next 
following the date on which the Protocol enters into 
force;  

3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, the 
provisions of paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of Article 25 of the 
Convention, as amended by Article XI of this Protocol, shall 
have effect with respect to: 

(a)  Cases that are under consideration by the competent 

authorities as of the date on which this Protocol 
enters into force.  For such cases, the commencement 
date shall be the date on which this Protocol enters 
into force. 

(b)  Cases that come under consideration after the date 

on which this Protocol enters into force. 

4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, the 
provisions of Article 26 of the Convention, as amended by 
Article XII of this Protocol, and Article 27 of the 
Convention, as amended by Article XIII of this Protocol, shall 
have effect from the date of entry into force of this 
Protocol.  

5.  Notwithstanding the entry into force of this Protocol, an 
individual who is entitled to the benefits of Article 20 of 
the Convention at the time of the entry into force of this 
Protocol shall continue to be entitled to such benefits until 
such time as the individual would have ceased to be entitled 
to such benefits if this Protocol had not entered into force. 

6.  This Protocol shall remain in effect as long as the 
Convention remains in force. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized 

thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this 
Protocol. 

DONE in duplicate at Washington this 24th day of January, 

2013, in the English and Japanese languages, each text being 
equally authentic. 

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:  

JAPAN: 

        FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
